Hi, my name's Andrew Barto,
and I'm going to talk
about eligibility traces.
What are eligibility traces
and why do they have that name?
By the end of this video,
you'll understand the
origin of the idea of
eligibility traces
and you'll actually
see that you've been
using them all along.
I know that the course
omits Chapter 12 of
the book which focuses
on eligibility traces,
but this little presentation
will give you a bit of a head
start in understanding
that theory
that occurs in Chapter 12.
So to begin, the idea of
eligibility traces comes from
a hypothesis by Harry Klopf,
The Hedonistic Neuron
Hypothesis and
Harry was a senior scientist
at the Avionics Directorate at
the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research.
He published a monograph in
1972 called The Hedonistic.
Well, I'm not sure
what is the title,
but it was about the
hedonistic neuron book in
'82 called The Hedonistic Neuron.
His idea, his hypothesis was
that neurons are
individually hedonists
that work to maximize a
local analog of pleasure
while working to minimize
a local analog of pain.
In other words,
according to his idea,
neurons are reinforcement
learning agents and the brain
is a society of
interacting reinforcement
learning agents.
Now a little bit about
neurons so that you
can understand
Klopf's hypothesis.
A neuron's output or
action is called an
action potential,
transmitted to other neurons
by the neuron's axon.
When a neuron generates
an action potential,
it is said to fire.
Action potentials act on
other neurons via synapses,
and synapses have efficacies or
weights or strength which
change during learning.
Here is a sketch of a synapse.
An action potential
would arrive via
the presynaptic terminal
shown at the top,
and it would affect
the postsynaptic neuron
shown at the bottom,
and the synaptic
weight or efficacy
we tend to think resides
in this connection,
and often we think of eligibility
as being something that
is implemented by
Biochemistry within the axon,
perhaps the presynaptic
terminal as suggested here.
Klopf's specific hypothesis then,
is that when a neuron
fires an action potential,
all the contributing
synapses become
eligible to undergo changes
in their efficacies or weights.
If the action potential
is followed within
an appropriate time period
by an increasing reward,
the efficacies of all
eligible synapses increase
or decrease in the
case of penalty.
So this raises the
question on what
should the shape of an
eligibility trace be,
where the eligibility trace
is the account of the memory that
is stored at the synapse
based on previous
activity of the neuron.
Harry's idea was
pointing out that
neurons are embedded
in a large number
of feedback loops of
varying durations.
Some feedback loops are within
the nervous system and
therefore very short.
Some go outside of the organism,
through the environment and
back through sensory organs
and therefore very much
longer feedback loops.
So the consequences of
a neuron's activity returns
to it with varying time delays.
The shape of an eligibility
trace is a kind of
histogram of the durations
of these feedback loops.
So here's a sketch of what
one of these eligibility
traces might look like.
So at the time the neuron
fires and after that,
there are a few very
short feedback loops
that return information.
There may be a maximum number at
some number like
600 milliseconds.
Of course, it would be
different for
different neurons and
then a few very long
feedback loops.
So the shape of an
eligibility trace,
as Klopf hypothesized,
look something like this.
Now there are two kinds
of eligibility traces.
One we call ontingent eligibility
depends on presynaptic and
postsynaptic activity,
as hypothesized by Klopf.
So presynaptic input needs to
participate in generating
the postsynaptic activity.
This leads to a three-factor
learning rule: pre-synaptic,
post-synaptic, and a reinforcement
input arriving later.
Non-contingent
eligibility is triggered
only by the presynaptic activity
leads to a two-factor
learning rule:
presynaptic and reinforcement,
and not dependent on
the activity of the
postsynaptic neuron.
So here's a little sketch
showing these ideas.
At the top are a few
presynaptic action potentials.
The next curve,
the next line shows a few
postsynaptic action potentials,
and you can see in two instances,
they occur roughly
together indicating that
the presynaptic action potential
is instrumental in causing
the postsynaptic action,
and for the contingent
eligibility traces,
those are the only two cases that
trigger and eligibility trace.
Whereas a non-contingent
trace will
add that last one which
is only triggered via
presynaptic impulse
even though there is
no postsynaptic impulse
at the same time.
Now looking at the
Actor-Critic Architecture,
which you have studied in terms
of policy gradient methods.
It turns out that
the main difference
between the actor and
the critic is that
the actor uses contingent
eligibility traces and
the critic uses non-contingent
eligibility traces.
So in the first case,
the actor attempts to
maximize reinforcement.
Whereas in the critic case,
it attempts to predict
reinforcement and
it's really due to
the main difference
in these two types of
eligibility traces.
Now the simplification
of the kind of
trace that Klopf
suggested is used in RL,
and it looks like this.
An exponentially decaying trace
instead of the more
complicated trace
that I showed earlier.
This is much easier to
implement and to analyze.
But it might be the case
that traces more like
Klopf's traces can
sometimes perform better.
I don't know of work that
really explores that question.
So you've actually been using
eligibility traces all along,
although the most simple kind.
Just the one time step
delay can be thought
of as implemented with
eligibility trace.
So here's the timeline
and event curves at time
t. Then at t plus 1 is the trace.
This means that the feedback loop
just takes one time step
and that's the only
one considered.
So this is a degenerate
case that nearly all the
reinforcement learning
algorithms that you've looked
at use as part of
their mechanism.
Okay, a few takeaways.
Eligibility was
proposed by Harry Klopf
as part of his hypothesis
of the hedonistic neuron.
Eligibility trace is a record of
a synapse's past activity so that
feedback arriving
after that activity
can make changes in the
synapse's strength.
The main difference
between the actor and
the critic in the Actor-Critic
Architecture is that
eligibility traces
are contingent for
the actor but non-contingent
for the critic.
Eligibility is essential
for taking into account
the role of signal timing
in synaptic learning rules.
Finally, a neuroscience is
accumulating evidence
that something very
much like eligibility traces
exist in the nervous
system. Thank you.